Introduction
Thalassemia is a hemoglobinopathy caused by variations
(including mutations, deletions, duplications, and gene
rearrangements) in alpha (α)- and beta (β)-globin gene
clusters that disrupt the balance of synthesis between
the α- and β-globin chains which compose hemoglobin
[2]. The α-globin gene cluster lies within chromosome 16
[3]. The HBA locus contains two almost identical genes,
HBA1 and HBA2, which encode the α-hemoglobin chain
[3, 4]. The clinical presentations of α-thalassemia vary
widely [5, 6]. There are three types of α-thalassemia carrier states (silent, mild, and intermedia) and one disease
state (major), depending on the number of globin chains
and the disease state [7].
Approximately 5% and 1.5% of the global population
carry mutations in α- and β-thalassemia genes, respectively [4, 8]. As a result, a large number of children are
born each year with hemoglobin disorders which can
lead to serious birth defects and place a heavy burden on
society and families [9]. According to literature reports,
the frequency of thalassemia gene carriage in southern
China was 3–24%, the genotype of αHb Westmeadα/αα carrying rate was 3.41% [10] in Guangxi, China, and the
prevalence of triplicated alpha thalassemia was 1.99% in
Guangdong and Hunan province of China [11, 12]. Thus,
accurate diagnosis of thalassemia in patients and carriers
remains challenging owing to the complexity of thalassemia genetics and genotype-phenotype correlations.
Traditional DNA analysis methods for the diagnosis
of thalassemia include gap polymerase chain reaction
(Gap PCR), PCR reverse dot blot (PCR-RDB) hybridization, multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification,
and Sanger sequencing [13, 14]. More recently, next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods have been used for
genetic screening for thalassemia [15, 16]. In addition to
discovering novel gene variants, these methods can effectively detect genotypes [16, 17]. In recent years, thirdgeneration sequencing (TGS) technologies have been
applied to detect thalassemia genes [18–20]. These technologies can generate ultra-long reads and achieve high
sequence precision and are characterized by the absence
of GC preference and single-molecule resolution [18, 19].
Such methods are helpful for the accurate diagnosis and
subsequent treatment of disease and minimize the risk
of missed diagnosis [18–20]. This study utilized TGS to
identify a novel genotype of α-thalassemia.
Case presentation
Patient
An 18-year-old Chinese female sought genetic counseling from the Department of Medical Genetics of West
China Second University Hospital of Sichuan University
(Chengdu, China). She informed the doctor that she had
an incomplete mediastinal uterus and primary infertility,
and hematological examinations showed abnormal values of routine hematological indices: a mean cell hemoglobin (MCH) of 25 pg (reference: 27–31 pg) and a mean
cell volume (MCV) of 78.2 fl (reference: 79–101 fl). The
result of Hemoglobin (Hb) analysis was normal. Currently, the patient has no other abnormal clinical manifestations. The patient’s parents are healthy and there is
no evidence of consanguineous marriage. The patient
was admitted for genetic screening for thalassemia. This
study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of
West China Second University Hospital of Sichuan University, and written informed consent was obtained from
the patient.
Methods
DNA extraction
Blood samples were drawn from the patient after
obtaining informed consent. Genomic DNA (gDNA)
was extracted from samples using the QIAamp DNA
Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen Bioinformatics, Hilden, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
GAP-PCR testing for large-deletion α-thalassemia
Single-tube multiplex Gap-PCR was performed for
the three common α-thalassemia deletions, including Southeast Asia (--SEA), rightward (- α3.7), and leftward (-α4.2), according to the manufacturer’s protocol
(Yaneng Bioscience, Shenzhen, China).
PCR-RDB assays
PCR-RDB assay was performed for three common non-deletional α-thalassemia mutations in the
HBA1 and HBA2 genes: c.427 T>C (Hb Constant
Spring), c.377 T>C (Hb Quong Sze), and c.369 C> G
(Hb Westmead). 17 β-thalassemia variations in
the HBB gene were also screened for: c. -82  C> A
[nt32(C→A)], c. -80 T>C [nt30(T→C)], c. -79  A > G
[nt29(A→G)], c. -78  A > G [nt28(A→G)], c. -11_
-8delAAAC (CAP [UTR + 40-43(-AAAC)]), c.2 T> G
[Int(ATG→AGG)], c.45_46insG [CD14-15(+ G)],
c.52 A >T [CD17(A→T)], c.79G > A [βE(GAG→AAG)],
c.84_85insC [CD27/28(+C)], c.94delC [CD31(-C)],
c.126_129delCTTT [CD41-42(-TTCT)], c.130G >T
[CD43(G→T)], c.216_217insA [CD71-72(+ A)],
c.92 + 1G >T [IVS-I-1(G→T)], c.92 + 5G >C [IVS-I5(G→C)], and c.316-197  C>T [IVS-II-654(C→T)]
(Yaneng Bioscience, Shenzhen, China).
Targeted NGS and data analysis
The M228 Kit (targeting 11 genes: HBA1, HBA2, HBB,
DMD, SMN1, GJB2, GJB3, SLC26A4, MT-RNR1, G6PD,
ATP7B) (MyGenostics, Inc. Beijing, China) was used
Zhou et al. BMC Pediatrics (2024) 24:330 Page 3 of 8
to capture the targeted gDNA of patient according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. The Nextseq CN500
mid Output Kit and NextSeq500 platform (Illumina,
Inc. California, United States) was used to generate double-end sequencing reads (150  bp). The reads
were mapped to GRCh37/hg19 reference by BurrowsWheeler Aligner [21]. Variants were called using
the Genome Analysis Tool Kit [22] and annotated by
Annovar [23]. Then, all variants were filtered based
on the frequency in the control population database
(1,000 Genomes Project, ExAC, gnomad, Esp6500).
Variants with a minimum allele frequency < 0.05 were
retained. Several variant prediction tools have been
used to predict the functional impact of candidate
variants.
TGS and data analysis
The experiments were conducted as previously
described [20]. gDNA was amplified using PCR with
primers targeting the majority of known structural
variation regions, single nucleotide variations (SNVs),
and insertions and deletions (indels) in the HBA1,
HBA2, and HBB genes. The PCR products were ligated
to barcoded adaptors and ligation reactions to construct individual sequencing libraries were conducted.
The libraries were quantified and pooled together by
equal quality and converted to an Single molecule realtime (SMRT) bell library using the Sequel Binding and
Internal Ctrl Kit 3.0 (Pacific Biosciences). The SMRT
bell library was then sequenced in the CCS mode on
the Sequel II platform (Pacific Biosciences) to generate
10–25 subreads per molecule. After sequencing, raw
subreads were analyzed using CCS software (Pacific
Biosciences) to generate CCS reads which were debarcoded by lima in the Pbbioconda package (Pacific Biosciences). After the alignment of the processed reads
to genome build hg38 using pbmn2 (Pacific Biosciences), structural variations were identified according to the HbVar, Ithanet, and LOVD databases. The
SNVs and indels were identified using FreeBayes1.3.4
(https://www.geneious.com/plugins/freebayes; Biomatters, Inc., San Diego, CA).
Variant confirmation by sanger sequencing
Sanger sequencing was performed on the gDNA of the
patient to confirm SNVs. The primers were designed
for standard polymerase chain reaction assays using
Primer five software. The forward 5’-TTCTGGTCC
CCACAGACTCA-3’ and reverse 5’-CAAAGACCAG
GAAGGGCCG-3’ primer pairs were used to amplify
Hb Westmead (c.369 of HBA2, reference transcript:
NM_000517.6). Chromas software version 2.4.1
(Technelysium Pty Ltd., South Brisbane, Australia) was
used to analyze the Sanger sequencing data.
Confirmation the ααα anti3.7 by PCR-electrophoresis assay
The ααα anti3.7 was verified using the PCR-electrophoresis according to the manufacturer’s protocol (six
α-thalassemia gene detection kit, including HKαα, --THAI,
fusion gene, ααα anti3.7, ααα anti4.2,-α27.6,Yaneng, Shenzhen,
China).
Clinical report
Gap PCR and PCR-RDB detected 23 genotypes in the
most common thalassemia: three types of deletions
(--SEA, -α3.7, -α4.2), three types of point mutations in HBA
genes (αHb Constant Springα, αHb Quong Szeα, and αHb Westmeadα),
and 17 types of point mutations in the HBB gene. The
results showed that the patient carried a -α3.7 heterozygous deletion and Hb Westmead (c.369  C>G) homozygous variation (Fig.  1). However, targeted NGS (sample
was tested three times) showed that the copy number
ratio of α3.7 was 0.8 (intermediate between normal, 1,
and loss of heterozygosity, 0.5) (Fig.  2A). We also identified a homozygous variant (c.369  C>G) in the HBA2
gene (NM_000517.6) (Fig.  2B). Sanger sequencing confirmed the targeted NGS results (Fig.  2C). Considering
the results of NGS and large-deletion α-thalassemias
were inconsistent, TGS was used. Interestingly, TGS
analysis showed that one chromosome carried the -α3.7
deletion, while the other carried the αααanti3.7 (confirmed
using PCR-electrophoresis assay [24], Figure S1), two
copies of the triplet which carried the HBA2: c.369 C>G
(Hb Westmead) mutation (Fig.  3). To the best of our
knowledge, this was the first report of the interaction
between-3.7 Kb deletion (-α3.7 deletion) and triplicated
alpha (anti-3.7) with homozygous Hb Westmead on two
copies.
Discussion and conclusion
The copy number of HBA genes (3, 2, 1, or none) in
Asian patients with thalassemia results in four different α-thalassemia syndromes [25]. Three normal HBA
genes result in a silent carrier state, usually without clinical symptoms [1, 2, 25]. Two normal HBA genes result in
mild α-thalassemia, usually with Hypochromic microcytosis but presenting as asymptomatic, without anemia [1,
2, 4, 25]. One normal HBA gene results in Hb H disease,
in which the clinical manifestations and the degree of
anemia vary greatly. Patients with mild symptoms only
had mild thalassemia without obvious clinical symptoms.
In severe cases, regular blood transfusion is required,
and obvious thalassemia features such as hepatosplenomegaly, thalassemia-like skeletal changes, jaundice, and
others are present [1, 2, 4, 25]. The absence of a normal
HBA gene results in homozygous α-thalassemia, which
manifests as fatal hydrops fetalis. Hemoglobin (Hb) Bart’s
edematous fetus is characterized by severe anemia, jaundice, systemic edema, hepatosplenomegaly, dysplasia,
Zhou et al. BMC Pediatrics (2024) 24:330 Page 4 of 8
Fig. 1 Routine genetic assays for 23 types of variations in HBA and HBB genes. (A) gap polymerase chain reaction (GAP PCR) was performed to detect 3
types of common deletions in a-thalassemia. The patient carries the -α3.7 heterozygous deletion. The positive control (PC) was -α3.7 heterozygosity deletion. (B) PCR reverse dot blot (PCR-RDB) assay was used to detect 3 types of common variants in a-thalassemia. The patient carries Hb Westmead homozygous variation. PC was Hb Westmead heterozygosity variation. (C) PCR-RDB assay was used to detect 17 types of common variation in β-thalassemia.
The patient carries no variant of this type. PC was c.316-197 C>T (βIVS−II−654M) heterozygous variation (NC: Negative Control)
Zhou et al. BMC Pediatrics (2024) 24:330 Page 5 of 8
Fig. 2 The results of targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) and Sanger sequencing. (A) The copy number of α3.7 following the targeted NGS. The
copy number ratio of α3.7 was 0.8 (between normal: 1 and loss of heterozygosity: 0.5). Positive control presented only a single copy and negative control
showed a copy number of two (PC: positive control, NC: Negative control). (B) NGS results showed c.369 C>G homozygous variation. (C) Confirmation of
the variant (c.369 C>G, homozygous) by Sanger sequencing
Zhou et al. BMC Pediatrics (2024) 24:330 Page 6 of 8
short limbs, and giant placenta, among other features,
and is a fatal blood disease. The affected fetus usually dies
in utero at 23–40 weeks of gestation or within half an
hour after birth as a result of severe anemia and hypoxia
[1–4, 25, 26].
Molecular diagnosis of thalassemia carrier states is
challenging, especially because of the complexity of the
HBA gene [9, 15]. Most thalassemia diagnostic laboratories use gap PCR and PCR-RDB to identify the most
prevalent pathogenic HBA1/2 and HBB variants [6, 15].
These methods are mainly used to detect four common
α-thalassemia deletions (--SEA, -α3.7, -α4.2, --Thai), three
non-deletion α-thalassemia variants (αHb Constant Springα,
αHb Quong Szeα, and αHb Westmeadα), and 17 common
β-thalassemia variants in the Chinese population [1,
15], and are economical and practical testing methods.
Nevertheless, in addition to the 23 common thalassemia
variants, there are hundreds of rare and emerging genotypes. In these cases, gap PCR and PCR-RDB cannot
meet the detection requirements, and more accurate and
efficient screening programs are needed. Recently, NGS
has emerged as an alternative molecular method for the
genetic detection of thalassemia. This method has the
advantages of simple sample collection and highly accurate results [15–17]. Compared to traditional diagnostic
methods, NGS can generate a large amount of genomic
data and provide abundant genetic information. However, it may not be able to detect polystructures, tandem
repeats, GC-rich regions, and other special structural
regions, as well as highly homologous sequences [14,
15]. TGS, also called SMRT, was developed and validated
using PacBio Sequel II [18]. Unlike NGS, which targets
only exonic regions or selected intronic regions, TGS is
used to generate longer PCR fragments that include both
intergenic and intragenic regions improving the ability to identify variants [27–31]. Each DNA molecule is
sequenced separately in TGS [18, 19]. TGS has multiple
advantages including extremely long reads and being
PCR-free [18–20]. Recently, TGS technology has become
popular for the genetic detection of thalassemia [27–29].
TGS can detect all mutation types of α-thalassemia and
β-thalassemia genes [18, 30, 31]. However, TGS is currently not widely used in clinical testing owing to its high
cost.
In this study, different methods were used for screening
thalassemia. First, the routine hematological phenotypes
of the patient were detected, finding both MCV and
MCH showed a mild decrease. Subsequent analysis of 23
common thalassemia variations showed that the patient
carried the -α3.7 heterozygous deletion and Hb Westmead (c.369  C>G) homozygous variation. In our study,
targeted NGS showed that the patient carried the homozygous variant c.369 C>G in HBA2, but the copy number
of α3.7 was between normal, 1, and loss of heterozygosity, 0.5, which cannot be determined accurately. Finally,
TGS analysis showed a novel genotype in the α-globin
gene cluster: one chromosome carried the -α3.7 deletion,
and the other carried the αααanti3.7, with two copies of the
triplet carrying the HBA2: c.369  C>G (Hb Westmead)
variant. Therefore, the intermediate copy number identified through NGS can be understood in the context of
the TGS results. The TGS results also intuitively showed
that the Hb Westmead homozygous variation detected
by PCR-RDB was not from the chromosome with the
-α3.7 deletion. Compared with GAP-PCR, NGS has a
wider detection range and can detect deletion types,
Fig. 3 Third-generation sequencing showed one chromosome carried the -α3.7 deletion, and the other carried the αααanti3.7. Two copies of the triplet
carried the c.369 C>G variant
Zhou et al. BMC Pediatrics (2024) 24:330 Page 7 of 8
point mutations, and other rare variants in common
thalassemia screening. However, owing to the limitation
of NGS testing over the highly homologous regions of
HBA1 and HBA2 genes, there may be false positives and
false negatives in the detection of α-deletion thalassemia.
It is necessary to use other methods, such as TGS, for
verification and typing. TGS uses long reads that could
cover many rare gene loci, and its PCR-free characteristic means it is possible to reflect real arrangements in the
genome [30, 31]. To the best of our knowledge, the genotypes identified in this study have not been reported previously. The genotype -α3.7/αααanti3.7 has been reported
in neonates from Mazandaran; however, the phenotype
of the newborn has not been specifically described [32].
There are many types of variation in thalassemia-related
genes, some of which are complex. When the clinical
phenotype is inconsistent with the laboratory molecular
test results, TGS should be performed to help accurately
identify genetic variations. Accurate genetic test results
are a prerequisite for the accurate assessment of reproductive risk.
In summary, a novel genotype in the α-globin gene
cluster was confirmed by TGS in a Chinese female with
mild decreases in MCV and MCH. Our study showed
that TGS technology has the potential to detect novel
variants which may be beyond the scope of traditional
analytical methods. Therefore, TGS can be an effective
and reliable approach for thalassemia screening in individuals suspected to carry rare mutations or complex
variants. In addition, TGS analysis should be considered
for the accurate diagnosis of uncertain cases of thalassemia, which could also improve the accuracy of genetic
counseling. Couples who are thalassemia carriers have
the opportunity to seek prenatal diagnosis and even preimplantation genetic testing services to reduce their risk
of having a child with thalassemia.